---
title: "Learning Rust like another natural language"
date: 2022-05-03T16:30:56+02:00
draft: true
---

Learning a new programiing language is really a unique experience. I always
enjoyed as much as enjoying learning a natural language.

When you learn a new natural language, there is this breaking point when you
start having a few words in that new language with people who seem to understand
you or too polite to tell you otherwise. When you read newpapers/flyers or other
textual media and from the context you kinda understand the meaning of the
words.

I think it was mostly while learning Rust. It has enough different concepts to
be different from just another C like programming language and some concepts
that I have never seen anywhere else to feel foreign enough to me.

Like many people started reading the [rust
book](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/), or the excellent blog posts like [A
half-hour to learn
Rust](https://fasterthanli.me/articles/a-half-hour-to-learn-rust).

But everytime I start to actually do something with that knowledge I am stuck
not remembering exactly what I read before and ends up struggling writting any
toy example that make sense.

This is a bit like when i got five stars in the italian duolingo before going on
holiday in italy and realising I can't construct any sentences without getting confused
with my (mother tongue) french or spanish.

I (kinda) learned spanish a long time ago when I was travelling in latin america
during a sabaticall year from work. Being immersed with the people and actually
making an effort to try to understand it (and being easy coming from a french
background) things made sense realy quickly. When I was a looking at for example
a duck and spanish speaking people were telling me there is "bulos" overthere, I
would immediately categorize that word with that duck picture and can remember
it when speaking about ducks.

So back to programming, I thought I may need to start switching to a more hands
on approach to learn the issue.

I had a "toy" project to watch
